Inside React Native’s New Bridge: Codegen, TurboModules, and the Future

React native is getting faster and cleaner. With the new architecture you do not need to write tons of bridging codeanymore. Thanks to codegen and TurboModules
We have now -
- Automatic native binding
- Type safe communication
- Better performance

In this guide, we’ll break down the concepts and build a real-world example module—step-by-step for both Android and iOS—that demonstrates:

✅ Sending a message from JS → Native
✅ Getting a message from Native → JS (via Promise)
✅ Using callbacks to return values
✅ Emitting real-time events from Native → JS

What is codegen ?
Codegen is a code generation system that automatically creates a native interface from files from typescript specification.

✅ What Codegen Does:
Reads TypeScript spec files (like specs/NativeMessageModule.ts)
Generates native interface files for both Android and iOS
Creates type-safe bindings between JavaScript and native code
Handles the boilerplate code automatically

⚙️ What’s TurboModules?
Turbo Modules is the runtime architecture that provides fast, type-safe communication between JavaScript and native code.

✅ What Turbo Modules Does:
Provides the runtime infrastructure for native-JS communication
Implements the TurboModule interface
Offers better performance than the legacy bridge
Enables synchronous calls and better memory management

Why Both Are Needed
Without Codegen: You'd have to manually write all the interface files
Without Turbo Modules: You'd still use the slow legacy bridge system
With Both: You get automatic code generation + fast runtime performance
Think of it this way:

Codegen = The factory that builds the blueprint
Turbo Modules = The engine that makes everything run fast

In this sentence:
“Codegen is the code generation system that automatically creates native interface files from TypeScript specifications.”

let’s break it down in simple terms.

1. What is a Native Interface?
A native interface is the connection layer between JavaScript/TypeScript code and native platform code.

JavaScript / TypeScript side → your app logic
Native side → platform code written in:
Java/Kotlin for Android
Objective-C/Swift for iOS
The native interface file tells the system:

“Here are the functions and data types that JavaScript can use to talk to native code.”

So it acts like a bridge or contract between the two sides.

Example idea

TypeScript specification:

export interface Spec {
  getBatteryLevel(): number;
}

Codegen automatically creates native interface files like:

Android (Java/Kotlin)

double getBatteryLevel();

iOS (Objective-C/Swift)

- (double)getBatteryLevel;

These files allow JS ↔ Native communication.

2. What is Codegen?

Codegen = Code Generator
It automatically creates native interface files from your TypeScript definitions.
Instead of writing bridge code manually, Codegen:
Reads the TypeScript spec
Understands the functions and types
Generates native bridge code automatically

3. Why Codegen is used (especially in React Native)

In the React Native New Architecture, Codegen:
Generates TurboModule interfaces
Generates Fabric component interfaces
Ensures type safety
Reduces manual native code

Example flow:

TypeScript Spec
       ↓
     Codegen
       ↓
Android Interface + iOS Interface
       ↓
JS can call native modules safely

4. Simple analogy

Think of it like this:

TypeScript spec → blueprint
Codegen → automatic factory
Native interface files → parts that connect two machines
Without Codegen, you would have to build those parts manually.

✅ Short definition

Native interface files are automatically generated files that define how JavaScript/TypeScript communicates with native Android and iOS code.


Yes, You can think of it as bridging, but with an important difference. 👍

1. Traditional Bridge (React Native old architecture)
In the old React Native system, communication worked through a Bridge.

Flow:

JavaScript  →  Bridge  →  Native (Android/iOS)
Native      →  Bridge  →  JavaScript

Characteristics:
Messages are serialized to JSON
Communication is asynchronous
You had to write native bridge code manually

2. Codegen Native Interface (New Architecture)

With Codegen, React Native automatically generates the interface code that connects JS and native code.

Flow:

TypeScript Spec
      ↓
   Codegen
      ↓
Native Interface Files
      ↓
JavaScript ↔ Native (directly through JSI)

Characteristics:

No manual bridge code
Type-safe (based on TypeScript)
Faster communication

Uses JSI instead of the old bridge


Aspect	             Old Bridge	             New (TurboModules + Codegen)
Manual bridging	     ✅ Required	            ❌ Auto-generated via Codegen
Performance	         🐢 Slower	             🚀 Much faster
Type safety	         ❌ Risk of mismatch	    ✅ Enforced via TypeScript
Native ↔ JS	         Async only	             Async + Sync support

Think of it this way:

CODEGEN = The factory that builds the blueprint
TURBO MODULES = The engine that makes everything run fast