In TypeScript, a data type defines the kind of values a variable can hold, ensuring type safety and enhancing code clarity.

Primitive Types: Basic types like number, string, boolean, null, undefined, and symbol.
Object Types: Complex structures including arrays, classes, interfaces, and functions.

Type	                              Description
Object	                 Represents any non - primitive type; however, its use is discouraged in favor of more specific types.
Array	                   Represents a collection of elements of a specific type.
Tuple	                   Represents an array with a fixed number of elements of specific types.
Enum	                   Represents a set of named constants, allowing for a collection of related values.
Function	               Represents a callable entity; can define parameter and return types.
Class	                   Defines a blueprint for creating objects with specific properties and methods.
Interface	               Describes the shape of an object, specifying property names and types.


  In 2008, js launched V8 engine, converted Interpreted language-- -> Just -in -time language
JIT - COMBINATION OF COMPLILE AND INTERPRETED language
Along with interpreting it also compiles the code

function() { } -->
  1st time executes-- > converted to binary 
next time whenever we call the function, it gives the binary code to cpu directly(Just in time)

Platform dependent and Platform independent

Feature	                     Platform Dependent Language	                                        Platform Independent Language
Definition	                 Code runs only on a specific OS or hardware platform	                Code can run on multiple platforms without modification
Compilation	                 Compiled into machine code for a specific platform	                  Compiled into intermediate code or bytecode
Portability	                 ❌ Low portability	                                                 ✅ High portability
Example	                     C, C++	                                                              Java, JavaScript
Execution	                   Needs recompilation for different OS / CPU	                          Runs on any system with the required runtime or virtual machine

  ***************************************************************

  Typescript---------------------------> JavaScript
Transpilation(same as compilation, just a fancy name)

  ***************************************************************

  let obj1: { name: string, age: number, address ?: string } = {
  name: 'Rohan Rawat',
    age: 24
}

***************************************************************

  INTERFACE VS TYPE

interface customer {
  name: string,
  age: number,
  balance: number
}

//PARTIAL - properties become optional
//REQUIRED - properties become neccessary
//READONLY - properties become immutable
const obj2: Partial<customer> = {
  name: "Rohit",
  balance: 333
}

  **************************** ARRAY OF OBJECTS *****************************

    interface people {
  name: string,
    age: number
}

let personsArray: people[] = [
  { name: 'e', age: 33 },
  { name: 'd', age: 13 },
  { name: 'k', age: 23 },
  { name: 'e', age: 31 },
]

  **************************** CLASSES IN TYPESCRIPT *******************************
    class Person {
      name: string,
      age: number

      constructor(n1: string, n2: number) {
        this.name = n1;
        this.age = n2;
      }
    }

const obj1 = new Person('d', 22)

TYPE ASSERTION -
let value: any = "This is a string";
let lengthOfString: number = (value as string).length;

console.log(lengthOfString);
A variable value is declared with the type any, which means it can hold any type of value.
Using a type assertion (as string), the compiler is informed that the value should be treated as a string.
The length property is then accessed safely because the compiler recognizes the value as a string.

What are the Modules in Typescript ?
Modules in TypeScript allow you to organize code into reusable, manageable, and logical units by encapsulating functionalities into separate files.

They help avoid global namespace pollution by providing scoped declarations.
Modules can be imported and exported, enabling code reuse and better maintainability.

math.ts (Module File):

export function add(a: number, b: number): number {
  return a + b;
}


######### We can not assign values of other types to a variable that is declared as a null type. only null and undefined can be assigned.
######### The null can not be assigned to undefined type variables:

1️⃣ Encapsulation

Encapsulation means hiding internal details of an object and allowing access only through controlled methods.
It protects data from being modified directly.

Simple Definition
Encapsulation = Data + Methods bundled together and restricting direct access to the data.

2️⃣ Binding

Binding means connecting a function with an object so that this refers to that object.
In JavaScript/TypeScript, this can change depending on how a function is called.

Example Problem
const user = {
  name: "Rohan",
  greet() {
    console.log(this.name);
  }
};

const greetFunction = user.greet;
greetFunction(); 

Output:

undefined

Because this is lost.

Fix using Binding
const greetFunction = user.greet.bind(user);
greetFunction();